[DX-1024, TT-11563] Updated mock response (#4074)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-middleware.md

---
title: "Mock Response middleware"
date: 2024-01-31

> description: "Detail of the Mock Response middleware"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Explains the Mock Response middleware"
```

tags: ["mock response", "mock", "middleware", "per-endpoint"]
---

A mock response is a simulated API response that can be returned by the API gateway without actually sending the request to the backend API. Mock responses are an integral feature for API development, enabling developers to emulate API behaviour without the need for upstream execution. 

Tyk's mock response middleware offers this functionality by allowing the configuration of custom responses for designated endpoints. This capability is crucial for facilitating front-end development, conducting thorough testing, and managing unexpected scenarios or failures.

## When to use the Mock Response middleware
#### Rapid API Prototyping
Developers can create mock responses during early API prototyping phases to simulate responses while the actual API is still under construction. This allows front-end developers, product managers, and others to validate concepts without blocking on full API implementations upfront.

#### Legacy System Migration

> When migrating from a legacy system to new APIs, mock responses can stand in to mimic the old system's outputs during the transitional phases. This provides continuity for client apps relying on the old system while new APIs are built that will eventually replace the legacy hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating from a legacy system to new APIs, mock responses can take precedence to mimic the old system's outputs during the transitional phases. This provides continuity for client apps relying on the old system while new APIs are built that will eventually replace the legacy hooks.
```

#### Disaster Recovery Testing

> The ability for a gateway to return well-formed mocks when backend APIs are unavailable helps test disaster recovery plans. By intentionally taking APIs offline and verifying the mocks' surface instead, developers gain confidence in the gateway's fallback and business continuity capabilitie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability for a gateway to return well-formed mocks when backend APIs are unavailable helps test disaster recovery plans. By intentionally taking APIs offline and verifying the mocks' surface instead, developers gain confidence in the gateway's fallback and business continuity capabilities
```

#### Enhanced CI/CD pipeline

> Test cases that rely on API interactions can mock those dependencies and provide virtual test data. This removes wait times for real API calls to complete during automated builds. Consumer testing can verify that provider APIs meet expected contracts using mocks in the CI pipeline. This ensures the contract remains intact across code changes before deployment. Frontend/client code can scale release cycles faster than backend APIs by using mocks to simulate planned API behaviors before they are ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test cases that rely on API interactions can mock those dependencies and provide virtual test data. This removes wait times for real API calls to complete during automated builds. Consumer testing can verify that provider APIs meet expected contracts using mocks in the CI pipeline. This ensures the contract remains intact across code changes before deployment. Front-end/client code can scale release cycles faster than backend APIs by using mocks to simulate planned API behaviors before they are ready.
```

## How mock responses work

When the Mock Response middleware is configured for a specific endpoint, it terminates requests to the endpoint and generates an HTTP response that will be returned to the client as if it had come from the upstream service. No request will be passed to the upstream. The mock response to an API request should be designed to emulate how the service would respond to requests. To enable this, the content of the response can be configured to match the API contract for the service: you can set the HTTP status code, body and headers for the response.

### Advanced mock responses with Tyk OAS

When working with Tyk OAS APIs, Tyk Gateway can automatically parse the [examples and schema]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi" >}}) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-tyk-oas#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint" >}})

### Middleware order and request processing

> When working with Tyk OAS APIs, the mock response middleware is executed at the end of the request processing chain, immediately prior to the request being proxied to the upstream. For this case, all other request processing middleware (e.g. authentication, request transforms) will be executed prior to the mock response.

Reviewer 2: @andyo-tyk maybe placing 2 bullet points here? one for OAS and one for Classic? or making OAS and classic bold? so that it doesn't just appear as a longer phrase but actual 2 different behaviours

Author: I've reformatted this in my next commit
